---
title: 'MUTH 251: Essay on Brahms Intermezzo Op.118 No.2'
linktitle:
type: book
math: true
---

A short music-theoretical essay on Brahms Intermezzo Op.118 No.2

<!--more-->

## Abstract

During the course [MUTH 251: Theory and Analysis 4](https://www.mcgill.ca/study/2020-2021/courses/muth-251), I wrote a short essay on Brahms Intermezzo Op.118 No.2.

## Introduction

The Intermezzo Op.118 No.2 in A Major is one of the six piano pieces
published in the---late work---Op.118. The piece has a large ternary
form, characteristic of slow movements, with a main theme that extends
from the anacrusis before the first measure to measure 49, an interior
theme in F\# minor that extends from measure 49 to measure 73, and
finally (after a brief retransition), a return of the main theme that
concludes the piece from measures 76 to 116. The structure of the three
larger sections consist, in all cases, of small ternary forms described
throughout this essay.

## Main Theme: Exposition

The piece starts with a simple and interesting motive in the upper
voice, arguably the most important sonority of the intermezzo: A
descending second from C\# to B as an anacrusis of eighth notes,
followed by an ascending third that culminates in a D half note at the
beginning of measure 1. The pattern is repeated in the third beat of
measure 1, this time replacing the ascending third with
an---unusual---ascending seventh going to an A one line above the treble
staff, at the beginning of measure 2.

These first two measures already introduced a lot of the material that
will be used throughout the piece, namely, the descending seconds, the
metric structure (which for now, remains accentuated on the first beat
of the measure, as it is notated, but will change constantly throughout
the piece), and the ascending seventh.

After the important motivic material from the beginning of the piece to
the first two beats of measure 2, which I denominated *Motive A*,
follows another motive, which will be particularly important in its
rhythmic structure rather than its intervallic configuration, a dotted
eight followed by a sixteenth note. In the context of its first
appearance, this motive, which I denominated *Motive X*, is presented in
two instances, first, in a pre-dominant harmony at the third beat of
measure 2 and then a dominant seventh harmony at the beginning of
measure 3.

As the piece continues, it will feel as if this *Motive X* has been
introduced by Brahms with the purpose of changing the pulse of the music
at pleasure. Particularly, when it is presented with an augmentation of
the rhythmic figure. Two pairs of descending seconds at measures 3 and 4
complement *Motive X* before *Motive A* is reintroduced at the end of
measure 4.

## Main Theme: Contrasting Middle

The harmonic material of the measures comprehending the beginning of the
piece (i.e., 1-16) comply with the Exposition section of a small ternary
form, ending with a PAC in the dominant (E Major) at measure 16.
Following the closing PAC of the Exposition, starts the Contrasting
Middle section of the Main Theme, at the third beat of measure 16. At
this point, the notated meter and the experienced meter are in conflict
as the third beat of measure 16 becomes the accentuated beat. In order
to introduce the new meter, Brahms has made use of a more dense texture
in the previous measure, particularly, a salient melodic movement of a
tritone within two eighth notes in the third beat of measure 15, which
intensifies the role of the third beat that is ultimately necessary for
transitioning to the contrasting middle section.

The contrasting middle comes with its own set of motivic materials on
the upper voice, which will be recurrent through the rest of the piece:
a figure of a “pedal” dominant (and later tonic) at the third beat,
followed by a descending second at the beginning of the measure,
appearing for the first time on measure 17 with the notes E, F\#, E. The
motive, which I called “Motive B”, then adds a leap of a fifth between
the pedal note and the descending seconds in measure 18, turning into E,
B, A.

At measure 20 (i.e., third beat of measure 19 and first two beats of
measure 20), the pedal at the beginning of the motive has moved to the
tonic. First, replicating the intervallic relationships at the beginning
of the contrasting middle with A, B, A (i.e., a pedal, an ascending
second, and a descending second). However, the ascending second between
the pedal and the second note of the motive is replaced by an ascending
third in measure 22 (A, C, A), a configuration that did not appear in
the pedal dominant.

By the time we arrive to measure 23 and 24, the almost infallible bass
on the third beat of each measure of the contrasting middle has been
removed, and with it, the experienced meter has again been compromised.
Brahms clearly establishes the experienced meter at the beginning of
measure 25, in accordance with the notated meter. This measure also
signals the beginning of a sequential passage (measures 25-28, plus the
resolution on the subdominant of measure 29) that concludes the
contrasting middle of the Main Theme and moves into the Recapitulation.

## Main Theme: Recapitulation

Brahms “sneaks” an off-beat descending second at the second half of
measure 29, that, together with the leap of a seventh above at measure
30, confirms the return of *Motive A*, or at least of its second half.
What follows next seems to be a combination of the descending seconds
accompanying *Motive X* at the Exposition of the Main Theme and the
descending eighth notes that initiate *Motive A*. This hybrid motive
makes up for the first quarter of the Recapitulation (measures 30-34).

A very interesting inversion of *Motive A* follows next, at the third
beat of measure 35. The rhythmic values of *Motive A* are respected and
the general intervals inverted: an ascending second in eighth notes
followed by a descending third (third beat of measure 34 to first beat
of measure 35), and then, the same ascending second followed by a
descending seventh (end of measure 35 to measure 36). *Motive X* also
comes back in two instances, this time accompanied by a denser
succession of eighth notes (measure 37).

Brahms, yet another time, overrides the experienced meter at the end of
measure 38 and brings, unexpectedly, the motive of the contrasting
middle (i.e., *Motive B*) to the Recapitulation. The version of *Motive
B* has the tonic as the pedal, however, it preserves the same intervals
presented originally at the dominant pedal during the Contrasting
Middle.

During measure 41, something remarkable happens, a variation of the
rhythmic *Motive X* is presented (augmentation with a dotted quarter and
an eighth note), which helps to override the experienced meter at the
beginning of measure 42, in accordance to the notated meter. Brahms
quickly departs from the new meter once more, at the end of measure 42,
establishing again the third beat as the accentuated beat. The same play
on the experienced meter repeats at measure 46, however, even though the
rhythmic circumstances are analogous, this time, the meter cannot be
reinterpreted at the third beat due to a surprising factor, Brahms has
brought *Motive A* to the voice of the contralto. *Motive A* is
anacrusic and we have listened to it several times, it becomes evident
whenever it returns, and now it has come back.

The experienced meter is preserved as strong on the first beat of
measure 47, and as we might expect from feeling those two eighth notes
as an anacrusis to the rest of *Motive A*, it continues into measure 48.
This last measure also signals the end of the Recapitulation and the
Main Theme of the Intermezzo.

By the end of the Main Theme, Brahms has taught us two important
lessons:

1.  The absolute importance of *Motive A.* *Motive A*, which had been
    used mostly in the context of a sub-dominant harmony, is now
    concluding the PAC of the Main Theme. That big leap of a seventh
    could actually be the closing Tonic of the piece (and when we reach
    the end of the piece, we confirm that this is the case).

2.  Experienced meter is crucial in this piece. *Motive A* is anacrusic,
    containing two eighth notes on the third beat before the accentuated
    half note. *Motive B*, on the other hand, is not anacrusic and, when
    introduced, is usually started on the third beat of the measure.
    This dual role of the third beat of being an anacrusis or the
    strongest beat is going to be (frequently) exploited by Brahms to
    move seamlessly through different experienced meters. Additionally,
    a dual role of the second beat is also going to be introduced in the
    Interior Theme.

## Interior Theme: Exposition

If I had to extend on what Brahms meant with the *in tempo* marking at
the beginning of the exposition of the interior theme (measure 49), I
would write: “Here, in measures 49-56, expression is achieved through
accentuation and not through tempo rubato”.

Brahms has already presented us the resources needed to move the
experienced meter of the music during the Main Theme. Now, it is time to
put it in practice.

The Interior Theme follows the convention of modal mixture, it starts
with F\# minor. The experienced meter is in congruence with the notated
meter. The motivic material does not resemble neither *Motive A* nor
*Motive B.*

Right from the beginning, we are exposed to accompanying triplets in the
bass and a melodic line in the upper voice. Until measure 51, the upper
voice suggests the continuation of the metric stress on the first beat
of each measure, then, a change in the rhythmic pattern at measure 52
strengthens the second beat and its descending figure of step and
thirds. This metric stress of the second beat is confirmed on measure
53, however, it is quickly corrected on measure 54 and until the end of
the Exposition.

## Interior Theme: Contrasting Middle

The contrasting middle of the Interior Theme starts right after the
repetition bar, at measure 57. The texture of this section is mostly
homorhythmic-homophonic, in a choral style. The key features a modal
mixture of F\# Major, contrasting with the F\# minor of the Exposition.

More importantly, the experienced meter of this section changes abruptly
to a 2/4 meter, accentuating the second beat of measure 57 and
continuing with an experienced 2/4 meter until the cadential six-four
chord at measure 64. The contrasting middle concludes with a C\#
dominant seventh chord that brings back the theme of the Exposition,
this time in the Recapitulation.

## Interior Theme: Recapitulation

In measure 65, Motive C of the interior theme comes back. This time, the
melodic line is not presented in the upper voice but alternating between
the register of the tenor and the contralto. One substantial difference
to the Exposition is that the play of modifying the experienced meter is
absent. Brahms begins the rhythmic pattern to stress the second beat of
measure 68 but abruptly replaces the culmination of that pattern with a
quarter note rest at the beginning of measure 69.

The texture of the Recapitulation feels more based on counterpoint than
the Exposition did. The experienced meter is kept in accordance to the
notated meter and the PAC finally comes at measure 73, closing with the
F\# minor tonic.

## Return of the Main Theme

After the resolution of the PAC of the interior theme, a small
retransition that continues with the triplet figures, extending from
measures 73 to 76, helps to connect the Interior Theme with the return
of the Main Theme.

During the Exposition, the texture of the upper voice is denser,
particularly where the *Motive X* is reintroduced. The Contrasting
Middle returns in the third beat of measure 84. Just as it did during
the Main Theme at the beginning, the Recapitulation is left intact,
combining motivic material from *Motive A* and *Motive B*. The leap of
the seventh, so salient at the beginning of the piece, now blends into
the arpeggiated tonic triad, during the PAC that closes this beautiful
Intermezzo.

## Figures

{{< figure library="1" src="muth251/motivea.png" title="Motive A." numbered="true" >}}

{{< figure library="1" src="muth251/motiveb.png" title="Motive B. During the Intermezzo, the first note is always played on the third beat of the measure, however, the accentuation is the one suggested in this figure." numbered="true" >}}

{{< figure library="1" src="muth251/motivec.png" title="Motive C. During the Recapitulation of the Interior Theme, the second and third measures of this Figure (not counting the anacrusis) change slightly, however, I have considered that the motive in the Exposition and the Recapitulation are the same motive." numbered="true" >}}
